insetdb
-------

An embedded database specially made to fit your data and hold it snuggly.


Purpose
-------

It'd be nice if I could make this a real thing, but for now it's an experiment
to:

  - Learn more about Database internals. All my previous work has involved
    fairly simple LSM trees and some personal variations on the WiscKey ideas
    over a direct WAL. Supporting more relational style constructs and seeing
    the constraints will be illuminating.

  - Test TigerStyle on a larger project with more dynamic data requirements.
    Using Zig has caused me to be infatuated by their resource management,
    commitment to assertions, pervasive (and wildly complete!) testing
    strategies, and design ideology.

    That said, almost all projects and blogposts I've seen of people trying to
    apply the style do this with relatively small toy projects. That's
    completely fine. But larger projects that have to handle unexpected input,
    non-trivial domains, and real error cases simply aren't clean in a way those
    projects are. I want to fully commit to using it in anger and see where it
    falls apart.

    The static resource allocation, while the sexiest part of TigerStyle, also
    seems relatively "simple" conceptually. That doesn't mean "easy" of course.
    As with many "draw the rest of the owl" concepts, I have a feeling the real
    barrier is uncovering a bag of tricks that allow you to work with static
    memory in various scenarios mixed with having the constant vigilance of
    having to actually apply them. That bag of tricks seems relatively
    undocumented outside the TigerBeetle codebase itself and various documents
    on hyper-local C memory management tricks.

  - Learn *ALL* the safety tricks I haven't been able to justify in employment.
    Property based testing, design-by-contract, deterministic simulation
    testing, static analysis tools. Hell, maybe I'll actually finally pull
    "Practical TLA+" off my bookshelf and prove some things.

  - See how far I can take the idea of pushing assertions, constraints, and
    expectations into the data layer. I have so much respect for SQLite. But my
    personal experience has been that its flexible type system isn't just "not
    strong enough," but actively harmful in that it gives a very false sense of
    security. It feels like they wanted to treat everything as bytes, but their
    hand was forced by the SQL standard.

    This makes me want to see what happens if we take the opposite approach to
    its logical extreme. What happens when we treat the database like a Type
    System? Incredibly expressive type definitions, constraints, and assertions
    on what your data looks like and how it behaves. That way you know exactly
    how it looks and acts. In the same way people treat SQLite as a file format,
    people could treat insetdb as a type spec. Just embed the db with the same
    schema in any project you want regardless of language, and rely on its
    assertions as a type of active specification even in incredibly dynamic
    languages.

    In a perfect world, I'd want this to enable writing your core program in
    Rust, Zig, Haskell, Go, Idris, or whatever language best fits your needs
    while enabling scripts, custom tooling, dashboards and other things that
    pop up in a real production system to be written in Ruby or Perl or whatever
    that adhoc not-quite-Lisp your coworker wrote and trusting insetdb to
    enforce that invariants and expectations are retained.

    Unfortunately, I think this vision will force me to abandon SQL. What a
    shame. I'll cling to it as long as I can while playing around, but there's
    really only so much you can layer on top. Perhaps I'll find a way to extend
    just the DDL while leaving queries familiar.

  - See how far I can specialize data layout based on that extra definition. Say
    we know a column is non-null, a JSON payload, and restricted to a handful
    of JSON Schema definitions. In theory, one could optimize storage
    significantly rather than just encoding the JSON into a binary format and
    stuffing it into a column. But...how do you even approach such a general
    problem? It's probably not even worth it. But damn it'd be cool. Cool enough
    to waste some of my funemployment time on it.

  - Get better at gettin' Ziggy wit it. (Na-na, na, na, na-na-na-na)

Should I use this?
------------------

Like, in a program? No.

If you end up learning from it or just wanna chat about it, hit me up at
badtuple@the.sarl. Seriously, I love talking to people. I don't think I'll be
accepting PRs right now. I just want a fun commitment-free learning project.

LLMs
----

On a learning project? For code I actually care about? No. Rest assured all bugs
written here are free-range and organic.
